# 25 Childbirth

## CRITERIA 

- Critical | Unconscious (unresponsive) | 1.2
- Critical | Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing | 1.2.3
- Critical | Is having a seizure (convulsion, fitting) | 1.2.4
- Critical | Has been diagnosed with pre-eclampsia. Has a headache, disturbed vision or restlessness | 1.2
- Critical | Major bleeding | 1.2

- Critical | Less than 37 weeks pregnant 
- Critical | Less than 37 weeks pregnant - Persistent or severe pain or contractions | 1.2
- Critical | Less than 37 weeks pregnant - Waters have broken, contractions | 1.2

- Critical | Pain or contractions
- Critical | Pain or contractions - Vaginal bleeding | 1.2
- Critical | Pain or contractions - Waters have broken | 1.2
- Critical | Pain or contractions - After a blow to the abdomen (after 20th week of pregnancy) | 1.2

- Critical | The baby is not in a normal position
- Critical | The baby is not in a normal position - Waters have broken | 1.2
- Critical | The baby is not in a normal position - Strong contractions | 1.2

- Critical | The baby is coming
- Critical | The baby is coming - The head is not presenting first (breech) | 1.2.5
- Critical | The baby is coming - Normal position (head first) | 1.2.5

- Critical | The baby is born
- Critical | The baby is born - Very premature (before week 37) | 1.6.7.8
- Critical | The baby is born - Weak and not breathing normally | 1.6.7.8
- Critical | The baby is born - The mother is still bleeding profusely | 1.6.8.9

- Urgent | Less than 37 weeks pregnant
- Urgent | Less than 37 weeks pregnant - Tightening or contractions, not continuous or strong | 10
- Urgent | Less than 37 weeks pregnant - Waters have broken, no contractions | 10
- Urgent | Less than 37 weeks pregnant - Some vaginal bleeding | 10
- Urgent | Less than 37 weeks pregnant - The baby shows ittle or no activity | 10

- Urgent | Full-term (week 37-40)
- Urgent | Full-term (week 37-40) - First time mother, less than 2 minutes between strong, regular contractions | 10
- Urgent | Full-term (week 37-40) - Given birth previously, less that 5 minutes between strong, regular contractions | 10
- Urgent | Full-term (week 37-40) - Waters have broken, no contractions | 10| 
- Urgent | Full-term (week 37-40) - The baby is born, mother and baby seem to be fine. | 10
- Urgent | Full-term (week 37-40) - Other symptoms related to this page | 10

- Normal | Full-term (week 37-40) | LVI
- Normal | Full-term (week 37-40) - First time mother, more than 2 minutes between contractions | LVI
- Normal | Full-term (week 37-40) - Given birth previously, more than 5 minutes between contractions | LVI
- Normal | Full-term (week 37-40) - Tightening or contracions, not regular or strong | LVI
- Normal | Full-term (week 37-40) - Other, not urgent | LVI

### Advice 1. IMPORTANT INFORMATION TO THE CALLER
- Help is on the way. I may need to phone you back, so keep this phone free until the medics arrive.
- Watch the person all the time. Tell me immediately if anything changes.

### Advice 2. LABOUR HAS STARTED
- Help the mother to find a comfortable position, preferably on the left side.
- Find lots of clean towels and warm blankets, as quickly as possible

### Advice 3. DIFFICULTY BREATHING
- Try to create calm around the mother, loosen tight clothing.
- Help her to sit up / find a comfortable position.
- Observe breathing.

If she can’t sit up:
- Lie her on her left side.
- Gently tilt the head back and lift the chin forwards.

### Advice 4. THE MOTHER HAS CONVULSIONS
- Maintain a free airway.
- Lie her on her left side.

### Advice 5. THE BABY IS COMING
- Get the mother to push with the contractions.
- Do not pull the baby during delivery.
- There may be a lot of blood mixed with mucous. The baby will be slippery and slimy, handle it carefully.

### Advice 6. WHEN THE BABY IS BORN
- Keep the baby warm.
- Immediate stimulate the baby to get it breathing properly.
- Wipe round the nose and mouth with a dry cloth on your little finger.
- After this, dry the rest of the baby with a clean towel and place it naked on the mother’s chest.
- Cover the baby with warm, clean blankets or towels.

### Advice 7. THE BABY IS NOT BREATHING PROPERLY
- If the baby is limp and still not crying, it needs to be strongly stimulated.
- Dry the baby thoroughly with a towel. Rub the baby’s back strongly with a towel to stimulate breathing.
- Keep the baby warm, cover him / her with warm towels.
- Check if the baby is breathing (take max. 10 seconds to check breathing)
- If s/he is not breathing or is breathing weakly you must help the baby to breathe (I will help you). 

### Advice 8. THE PLACENTA
- The placenta may be delivered immediately after the birth but can also take time to arrive.
- The midwife must check the placenta, this is important.
- Put it in a plastic bag / container.
- You do not need to cut the cord.

### Advice 9. IF THE BLEEDING DOESN’T STOP
- Apply pressure to the mother’s abdomen, right under the navel.
- Keep applying pressure until medics arrive.

### Advice 10. CONTACT THE NEAREST MATERNITY HOSPITAL
AMK / LVS can connect the caller to the nearest maternity hospital and join in the call if necessary.

## Related Questions 
Are there any children / adolescents present? Are they in need of immediate care or support?

### ABOUT THE PREGNANCY
- How many weeks pregnant?
- Last period?
- When is the EDD (estimated date of delivery)?
- Normal pregnancy so far?
- Any complications?
- Given birth before?
- Did it happen quickly?
- How was the baby presenting at your last appointment?
- Anything particular seen on the last scan?

### CONTRACTIONS
- How long between contractions?
- Are they regular contractions?
- Are they strong?
- Strong contractions each time?
- Do you feel the need to push?

### BLEEDING
- Bleeding more than during a period?
- Are you in pain?
- How long has she been bleeding like this?

### SUSPECT PRE-ECLAMPSIA / ECLAMPSIA
- Has she been diagnosed with eclampsia / pre-eclampsia or eclampsia?

### RESUSCITATING A NEWBORN
The baby needs help breathing if s/he is gasping / not breathing / not crying / is very limp:
• Place the baby on his / her back. Dry him / her thoroughly with a clean towel.
• Establish a free airway:
- Place a towel or similar under the shoulders (not under the head) to straighten the neck.
- The neck must not be tilted backwards or forwards, the nose should point upwards.
- Place a finger under the hard part of the baby’s chin, lift up the point of the chin.
- If there is a lot of blood or mucous in the baby’s mouth, it may be blocking the airway - take a few seconds to remove it.
• Check if the baby is breathing (max. 10 seconds).
• You must give the baby rescue breaths if s/he isn’t breathing.
• Keep the airway open (see above)
• Place your mouth over the baby’s nose and mouth and blow very gently until you see the chest rising (the baby has very small lungs - if there are others present, get someone else to put a hand on the baby’s chest to check if air is getting into the lungs).
• Give 30 rescue breaths per minute.
• Continue to do this until the medics take over or until the baby begins to cry or starts to breathe.
• Remember to keep the baby warm!
• Do not cut the cord. If the placenta comes, place at a higher level than the baby.

## Information 

## ALVORLIG PREEKLAMSI/ SVANGERSKAPSFORGIFTNING OG LANG TRANSPORT TIL SYKEHUS
- Vurdere start av antihypertensiv behandling.
- Vurdere behov for sedasjon, analgetika og antiemetika.

## FØDSEL
Normal fødsel uten komplikasjoner tar vanligvis flere timer slik at den fødende rekker å komme til en fødestue / fødeavdeling med egen transport / drosje. Ambulanse kan være nødvendig i enkelte tilfeller. Vannavgang tyder på at fødselen er i gang, men ikke at det nødvendigvis skjer raskt. Tid mellom hver ri betyr heller ikke så mye. Sterke rier eller trykketrang kan bety at fødselen er nært forestående. Flere tidligere fødsler øker sjansen for at fødselen kan skje raskt.

## RESUSCITERING AV NYFØDTE
Gå til resuscitering av nyfødte ev. til 02 Bevissløst barn

## PREMATUR FØDSEL (FØR 37. UKE)
Prematur fødsel kan skje raskt og bør skje på sykehus som har fødeavdeling med nyfødtintensiv. Barnet er umodent, lungene er underutviklet og det er fare for nedkjøling. Intensivbehandling inkludert respiratorbehandling kan bli nødvendig.

## UNORMALT FOSTERLEIE
Unormalt fosterleie oppdages vanligvis på svangerskapskontroll og er oftest kjent når fødselen starter. Bare 3 % ligger i seteleie ved termin. Hvis siste svangerskapskontroll viser seteleie, tvillinger, eller at hodet ikke er festet i fødselskanalen (høyt og bevegelig) og vannet går, kreves båretransport pga. fare for fremfall av navlesnora. Fødselen kan
ta tid, og hvis barnet blir sittende fast i fødselskanalen, er det fare for både mor og barn. Ved kjent feilstilling skal fødselen skje på fødeavdeling med muligheter for keisersnitt. Prehospitalt helsepersonell bør settes i direkte kontakt med jordmor eller gynekolog for veiledning før og under ambulansetransport.

## UNORMAL BLØDNING HOS MOR ETTER FØDSELEN
Store blødninger kan oppstå inntil en måned etter en fødsel. Slike blødninger kan bli kritiske.

## PREEKLAMPSI / SVANGERSKAPSFORGIFTNING
Utvikles etter 20. svangerskapsuke. Symptomer ved svangerskapsforgiftning er høyt blodtrykk, protein i urinen og unormalt store svangerskapsødemer. Økende hodepine, synsforstyrrelser, kvalme og ev. smerter i øvre del av magen er tegn på truende eklampsi med kramper som er livstruende både for mor og barn. Symptomene må undersøkes av lege. (Helsenorge)


## EKLAMPSI / SVANGERSKAPSKRAMPER
Er en forverring av preeklampsi/svangerskapsforgiftning med insidens på 5/10.000 fødsler. Kan forekomme før (40 %), under (30 %) eller etter fødsel (30 %, inntil 7 dager). Kvinnen kjenner ofte på en uro og vil være hyperefleksiv, ofte med klonus (muskulær krampetilstand med rykkende, ufrivillige bevegelser). 90 % har forvarsel med intens pannehodepine, kvalme, epigastriesmerter og synsforstyrrelser. Primærbehandling på sykehus er magnesiumsulfat (MgSO4) og kvinnen bør transporteres raskt dit for behandling og vurdering av forløsning. Diazepam (10-20 mg) kan gis intravenøst eller som rektalvæske i påvente av annen behandling.