# 30 Hyperthermia / heat stroke / heat exhaustion

## Criteria 

- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat:
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Unconscious (unresponsive) | 1.2.3
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing | 1.2.4
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Seizure (convulsions, fit) | 1.2.4.5
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Drowsy (decreased level of consciousness) | 1.2.3.5
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Completely passive (uninterested, complacent, detatched) | 1.2.3.5
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Weak and tired after abnormal and/or demanding physical exercise | 1.2.3
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Has taken drugs | 1.2.3
- Critical | Possible hyperthermia (heatstroke) or has been exposed to extreme heat - Very rapid pulse | 1.2.3

- Urgent | Exposed to extreme heat:
- Urgent | Exposed to extreme heat - Very dizzy | 2.3
- Urgent | Exposed to extreme heat - Weak and tired | 2.3
- Urgent | Exposed to extreme heat - Unwell | 2.3
- Urgent | Exposed to extreme heat - Headache | 2.3
- Urgent | Exposed to extreme heat - Rapid pulse | 2.3
- Urgent | Exposed to extreme heat - Other symptoms related to this page | 2.3

- Normal | Exposure to extreme heat, no other symptoms | LVI
- Normal | Prolonged exertion in a hot climate and muscle cramps | LVI
- Normal | Other, not urgent | LVI

### Advice 1. IMPORTANT INFORMATION TO THE CALLER
- Help is on the way. I may need to phone you back, so keep this phone free until the medics arrive.
- Watch the casualty all the time. Tell me immediately if anything changes.

### Advice 2. SAFETY AT THE SCENE
- Keep out of danger and always ensure the safety of others.
- If possible and without risk, get the person to safety.

### Advice 3. MEDICATION
- Any medication being used by the person must accompany them at all times.

### Advice 4. DIFFICULTY BREATHING
- Try to create calm around the person, loosen tight clothing.
- Help the person to sit up / find a comfortable position.
- Observe breathing.

If the person can’t sit up:
- Lie the person on one side.
- Gently tilt the head back and lift the chin forwards.

Infant under 1 year:
- Keep the head in a neutral position and lift the chin forwards.
- Observe breathing, tell me if there is any change.

### Advice 5. DIFFICULT TO WAKE, DROWSY, SLEEPY (altered level of consciousness)
- Lie the person on his / her side.
- Make sure the airway is free.
Check FIRST AID HYPERTHERMIA (left)

### LENKER TIL OM-KAP.
Hypertermi
Typiske tegn på hypertermi

## FIRST AID FOR HYPERTHERMIA
- Remove as much clothing as possible immediately.
- Move the person to a cooler place. Start to cool the person down:
    - Young and healthy: Bring down the temperature by immersing the body in
cold water if available.
    - Alternatively, and with the elderly/ sick: Pour cold water over the body and/or use a fan / the wind / a draught to cool
the person.
    - If available, wrap cold packs in a cloth and place them under the armpits, the groin and the neck.
    - Patients who are alert / awake should drink lots of cold fluids - sports drinks and rehydration drinks if available.
    - Check the body temperature if you have a thermometer, and it is practical to do so.

## Information 

### HYPERTERMI - SYMPTOMER OG FUNN (hentet fra Legevakthåndboken)
Symptomene avhenger av grad av hypertermi:

#### TEGN PÅ HETEKRAMPER
- Muskulære smerter og muskelkramper.
- Muskulaturen i tykklegg og bukvegg er ofte affisert.
- Tegn på oppheting som varm, svett hud og takykardi, økt kroppstemperatur.
- Normal bevissthet.

#### TEGN PÅ HETEUTMATTELSE
- Utmattelse
- Svimmelhet
- Hodepine
- Kvalme.
- Kroppstemperatur 38,3-40 °C.
- Ingen eller milde sentralnervøse symptomer.
- Eventuelt oppkast.
- Eventuelt lokaliserte kramper.

#### TEGN PÅ ALVORLIG HYPERTERMI (HETESLAG)
- Påvirket bevissthet, ofte synkope
- Eventuelt andre sentralnervøse symptomer, som synsforstyrrelser, forvirring, irritabilitet, bisarr atferd, ataksi eller generaliserte kramper.
- Struttende blodårer
- Kjernetemperatur mer enn 40 °C.
    - Eventuelt takykardi, takypné,hypotensjon eller opphør av svette.

### HYPERTERMI / HETESLAG
Skyldes langvarig varmepåvirkning. Hypertermi er relativt sjelden i Norge, men forekommer likevel i følgende situasjoner:
- Ved sterke fysiske anstrengelser (mosjonsløp, maratonløp, brannmenn i tjeneste o.l.).
- Ungdom i ekstrem fysisk aktivitet som ved «rave parties», spesielt om de også har
tatt sentralstimulerende midler (ecstasy, kokain, amfetamin e.l.).
- Barn som forlates i lukkede biler på varme sommerdager
- Gårdsarbeidere i store åker uten skygge (jordbærplukker mv.)

### TYPISKE TEGN PÅ HYPERTERMI
Typisk er nedsatt bevissthet, rød og varm hud (i motsetning til ved hjertesykdom da huden oftest er kald og blek), struttende blodårer, rask puls. Pas. kan etter hvert utvikle tegn på sirkulasjonssvikt med besvimelsestendens og blek, klam hud, og kan bli bevisstløs. Hvis kroppstemperaturen når opp mot 42 ºC, kan tilstanden bli livstruende. Rask behandling på stedet er påkrevet (se Førstehjelp ved hypertermi).